---
layout: post
title: java series 01 - components that are involved in compiling and running a Java program
---
 
01 )What are the important components involved in compiling and running a Java program?
When working on Java applications, the first software we download and install is the JDK (Java Development Kit), which includes:

JRE (Java Runtime Environment)
Java compiler
Java command (used to run a Java program)
Key components:
JDK (Java Development Kit)

Comprised of the JRE and several programs such as the Java compiler and Java command.
Different versions are available for different operating systems.
JRE (Java Runtime Environment)

Can be installed separately but is usually bundled with the JDK.
The JRE is necessary to run Java programs.
Compilation Process

The Java compiler converts Java code into bytecode, which is platform-independent.
Bytecode is not machine code, but it’s understood by the JVM (Java Virtual Machine).
JVM (Java Virtual Machine)

The JVM interprets bytecode and converts it into machine code that the operating system understands.
JVM makes Java platform-independent, allowing Java programs to run on any OS with the appropriate JVM.
Just-in-Time (JIT) Compiler

The JIT compiler, part of the JVM, optimizes code execution by converting bytecode into machine code in smaller chunks.
This process is more efficient and improves performance through optimizations like function inlining.
JIT is enabled by default but can be disabled using -Djava.compiler=NONE.
By making use of the JIT compiler, your Java application can achieve better performance as it optimizes code execution step by step.
